My theory of social change. I am curious to see what other people think?

I am feeling gentle
I am feeling introspective
I am feeling open
I am feeling curious
I am feeling lonely
I miss my mom

We learned in class about discovering your own theory of social change. I had never thought about that before, and it really made me question where I’m going. Our teacher gave the example of education as a theory of change: by instilling values and teaching kids certain topics it will lead to good things for the world. Or some other people believe in politics, or narrative, or community organizing. I guess in the end your theory will be a mixture of a few things. I think my main theory is emotions.

I went to a meeting for the Democratic Socialists of America (DSA) in Minnesota about a month ago. The twin cities chapter is working on a lot of things that I believe in, such as getting rid of trash incinerators and supporting apartment resident organizing. I had been looking for community for when I move back to MN, but for some reason I felt hesitation about landing in DSA. I think that feeling comes from differences in our theories of social change. 

I feel like if everyone felt their feels then we would not be in the mess we are in today. Everything is always changing. God is change. What does socialism even mean? The meaning is constructed constantly and even if we do overthrow everything and establish a better system, what will guide us in this new terrain? What led people to believe in socialism in the first place? Why do people decide to put their values first? I think the answer is our emotions. I think they are the only thing we really know. They are our intuition. 

I am not saying that you should act on every emotion. I think actually what may be equally as important as feeling them is reflecting and understanding them. They are a form of information that society tells us to dismiss. They can be scary too, especially given the systems we live in. Why do our emotions differ from our thinking? How do we really unlearn? This can be a topic for another time. It can be scary to feel things sometimes because often it goes against our knowledge and who we want to be. Fear, insecurity, a desire to push down those feelings. I know it’s cliché but I think the only way out is through. It is a self-perpetuating cycle to avoid your feels. Unfortunately for many people the only way to break the cycle is emotional trauma. I don’t think that is the case for everyone but in my experience it is more common and was my path. I would love to learn about alternative paths. 

I believe it is possible to align your thinking and your feeling. To use the onion metaphor, we are layered. You can debate about if there is a core, but there are certainly things deeper than others. I think each time you acknowledge an emotion and seek to understand how it came to be, you travel down another layer. Sometimes it can feel like there are a million layers, but eventually I think things get easier. Pretty deep down I found my childhood. Buried under a mass of confusing reactionary layers. At my core I feel a desire to be loved by my parents, and to be accepted for who I am. 

I think wellness can come in many forms. One of the highest levels is exercise. Exercise feels like a blanket that goes over all the layers you have, and no matter how deep the wound is you might feel some release. But that release is only temporary. Which isn’t inherently bad because everything is temporary. But I think trying to address a deeper layer can start the process of healing. You can be more specific about how you approach it, and honest with others about what you are looking for. Maybe that’s how you unlearn. 

The body remembers more than the mind. How can you heal the body? Ok I realize maybe this is also a topic for another time. 

To me it feels like the best thing that I can do for the world is care for others so that they can be liberated. We are all trying to heal. I feel like all I can do is that, and trust that through individual liberation we can find a collective path forward. I believe in a just process, and I don’t know if there can be a just process without being free? Even if we get to the right place, what will keep us going in the right direction? What does liberation mean?

It’s probably not that simple and I think I missed a lot of stuff, but this has been my experience of the world. Maybe theory of social change isn’t even what I’m talking about? I am curious to learn more, maybe how I see things will change? 
