Heartbreak
Heartache
Lovesick
Lonely
I am learning
I am healing

I recently reduced my world to 10 other people. That’s not really the truth, but I’m on a study abroad program and it can sometimes feel like that. I’m in a group of 10 other students, and we often go on visits to farms and stay the night, no cell service. It feels like they are my new family, my new friends.

On one of these trips I became attached to someone in our group. We connected. We had a deep engaging conversation where we poured ourselves out and felt each other. I felt like I had found someone. I felt understood, validated, heard, and hopeful. I started planning our future, how we would fly to see each other, where we would both work, the things we would bond over, the meals I would cook for them. I feel embarrassed admitting this. I fell hard. We barely knew each other.

In the moment it felt so real. However, I know now that what I felt was “cathexis”. As Bell Hooks puts it: “when we feel deeply drawn to someone, we cathect with them; that is, we invest feelings or emotion in them”. While this process can be helpful in cultivating loving spaces, it should not be confused with love itself. And in my case, this feeling of cathexis coupled with my history of attachment and lack of emotional depth in my previous relationship, blinded me. 

I thought I had healed more than I really had. 

On any given day of my normal college days at Olin I talk to many people. Each of these interactions  stretch, grow, hold, drain, and fuel me in some way. While some of these impacts I feel walking away from a conversation, I think most go unperceived. But they add up. The tiny pushes exacted through the complexity of social interactions bubble up as dominant emotions. These are things I can feel, and that I try to explain. 

These interactions are not the only thing affecting my well-being, but I think they do a lot. In my opinion, more than we’d like to think. Most of the systems we hate exist only in our personal and collective imagination, and can therefore be perpetuated on an individual level. We think money is valuable because other people do. I wear clothes in public because there are laws, and I believe in judges and lawyers who believe those laws hold power. Yuval Noah describes the origin of this phenomenon in his book Sapiens as “the appearance of fiction”: a shift in the history of humanity that allowed gossip bound human organizations to grow from 150 people bands into empires. Today, “large numbers of strangers can cooperate successfully by believing in common myths”. 

As damaging as this idea can be, for example in the case of corporations in the US, it also feels empowering. When it feels like the world and all its systems are against you, someone can come in with perhaps only a few words, a gesture, or a look, and show you otherwise. This gives me hope. Some systems that live inside us might be harder than others to identify and to resist. We grew up with things like gender, race, and capitalism reinforced and demonstrated by the people around us. Perhaps rather than trying to purge ourselves of these concepts, we need to imagine new ones. Create new collective myths that humans are wired for good, that everyone has value inherent to their being, that relationships are our greatest asset, and that listening and feeling and crying are admirable.

Maybe this is how you heal. But still, just knowing these things doesn’t change my body’s memory.

In my study abroad group of 10 people, my daily relations and encounters hold more weight than I’m used to. The collection of social interactions that influence my well-being is more narrow. The reality of my situation becomes more apparent. I can no longer skate around the social arena. The systems of attachment and loneliness and grief embedded in my body reveal themselves. My intentions become real. In my mind I was looking for a close friendship, but in reality I was hoping to lean on someone. To continue my cycle of emotional attachment. To feel full and complete because someone else wanted me. 

I thought I had healed more than I really had.

I thought I was telling myself the truth. I guess you can only know what your heart will allow you. Or as Adrienne Marie Brown put it in her book Emergent Strategies, “perhaps love can only be as large as grief demands”. In my cycle of healing, I travel back down. And in this new space I am met with new questions. Have I known love? When will I be ready? How can I find comfort in my healing? 
