I feel hopeful
I feel moved
I feel nervous
I feel small
I feel present

I’m staying with my Grandma in Ohio and I made Koldūnai today - Lithuanian pierogies. I spent all day cooking because my grandma’s health isn’t great. It felt good to be able to help in some way, hold on to some semblance of control. Maybe the next people that visit can enjoy the extras in the freezer. Koldūnai are filled with beef and pork and served with a healthy scoop of chopped bacon and onions. They’re delicious, and remind me of my grandma’s smile. A perfect pocket filled with family, flavor, and tradition. The food I always asked for when I visited.

My sister told me that pigs are very smart, smarter than dogs actually. I’m not a vegetarian, but sometimes I think I should be. I’m sure there’s a whole laundry list of reasons I should stop eating meat, but then there’s also Koldūnai. This is when my heart fails to guide me. Too much to hold onto all at once, and a middle ground veiled by binaries.

What I learned on my study abroad program is that we live in contradictions. Our lives are full of them in everything we eat, touch and think. I get bogged down by perfection. I lived so long blissfully unaware of so much in this world – emotions, oppression, extraction – that I now feel a responsibility to live honestly. To open myself to the problems being faced by our most vulnerable populations. But it’s immobilizing. It’s impossible to take a single step forward without carrying with me mountains of systemic injustice. It feels like nothing is enough and everyone around me is turning away. I find myself clutching so tightly to the ways I see the world. 

I just graduated from college with a degree in engineering. I learned a lot, I feel grateful for Olin, and I don’t want to be an engineer. I would. I really would, but I feel the pull of too many strings. I wince when I call myself a software engineer. Internalized guilt that the capitalist machine rewards me so greatly, that my work usually benefits the most wealthy, and that the tools I rely on were extracted from our earth and forced through a pipeline of exploitative labor. I know that it’s not that simple and that engineering can help people but it’s hard to believe that. I sit here behind generations of work, immigration and education that has gotten me to this point, but I can’t take that last step, and it’s gonna take a while to find another staircase.

I think about liberation sometimes. Have I been free? Can everyone be free? For me I experience liberation as an emotion. I feel a resonance with my heart and intuition. I feel truth flowing through my body, concentrating in my chest and swelling up to my throat and down into my stomach. It’s not exactly hard to speak, but nothing needs to be said. A space where I can reach out and touch both my happiest and saddest moments. A space that I typically inhabit alone. I think about my Mom. Running around our house raising three kids, trying to give them everything she never had. I think about my Mom’s Mom, moving to a foreign country with half her children and a controlling husband. I want them to be free. To feel free. Maybe they are, in their own way. Or maybe this is their gift to me, to pass on to my children.

These are the things that place me in the current moment. This moment of new beginnings, of action, of realization. I feel lost without community. I know that I’m in there, somewhere deep down. These days I rely on my faith to guide me forward and my discipline - a re-emerging skill that I’ve suppressed in response to our education system – to keep me moving. I feel like I’m swimming upstream, against the current of my history. Perhaps this is simply the next step in the journey of generational healing – having enough to no longer feel the need to climb to the top. I am hopeful and grateful, making each move to become the person I want to look up to. 

Sources

https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/13549839.2013.832554

https://open.spotify.com/episode/78Nwv2qT9xBrsm8FBHKYVM?si=1f4440215ec24147

https://open.spotify.com/episode/1s9BBJUtKAE087kW9mD7kw?si=qPjQdktvRieUpLQV1hZn2w




