I feel sad
I feel hopeful
I feel confused
I feel grateful
I feel like I am changing

Sometimes I wish I could squash all my problems. I wish I could trace them all back to some aha radical, reach some deeper understanding, then be free. Free to live a life of peace and harmony. But in reality, I think our problems are shared. Which is beautiful. Our problems give us collective purpose; a reason to live outside of our constructed selves. This is the beauty of the human struggle. The world we want inhabits the space between us all, in every encounter and action. “All that you touch You Change. All that you Change Changes you. The only lasting truth Is Change” (Butler, 1993). To me, moving forward means becoming aware, reflecting and caring for myself to change our everyday co-construction of what is. This is what I know, and what follows is an effort to practice that. This is a reflection on gender during my 1 month visit to Malawi in Oct 2023. Much of my focus is on my homestay in a rural village called Ponya, where I spent 12 days.

“No, that’s ok” responds Catherine in Chichewa, after I expressed that I wanted to learn cooking from her. Catherine lives with my homestay family in Malawi and was hired to cook and care for the house. Did Catherine deny my request because of my gender? Drawing on Katie MacDonald’s description of the encounter, this interaction can be understood as the space between each of our histories, identities, politics and geographies (MacDonald, 2019). Situated in this relation, I carry with me Asian/white middle class American college able-bodied male-presenting student visitor in a rural Malawian household. That is to say, the ideas I present here reflect this positionality, not as privilege – a concept that “relies on others not having privilege” – but as the framing I use to approach, process, and understand these encounters (MacDonald, 2019). Catherine may have denied my request because I am a visitor, or because I don’t speak Chichewa, or because she prefers to cook alone. The lens I use to feel and remember this interaction changes the way I construct gender in myself, and in turn changes my lens. “All that you Change Changes you” (Butler, 1993).

Gender, like anything else in this world, is fluid, elusive, ever-changing yet present. It lives nowhere but inhabits our everyday life. We can see this in the way people dress. In rural Malawi, most women wear chitenges: a patterned cloth wrapped around the legs to create a long skirt. This clothing article originally confused me: it appears to restrict both stride and bending down despite the physical labor women perform each day - fetching water, chopping firewood, farming by hoe etc. This points to “particular discourses of the [female] body that are inherently gendered” (Entwistle, 2000), highlighting the relation between body and dress in a modest Christian culture. However, this analysis runs the risk of painting women as “passive bodies … merely constrained to social forces” (Entwistle, 2000). To my host mom Grace, “chitenges are our culture … passed down from our parents … [wearing them is] cultural preservation”. She told me they are comfortable, and girls are proud to learn how to wear them when they turn 10. This kind of “reverse discourse” (Entwistle, 2000) pushes back on dominant narratives, shifting the perpetuation of gendered oppression by offering grounds for individual reclamation. I believe to remake the world we start by listening, honoring and seeing people for their complexity, agency, and beauty. This same practice can be applied to my homestay kitchen.

My homestay kitchen is outside and consists of fire pits and small charcoal stoves. The cooking is done by Catherine, our host brother, and sometimes our host mom. This kitchenspace not only feeds the family, but “[asserts] cultural identity”, allowing a “means of expressing what people think of themselves, who they are, where they live, and what their place is in the natural and social world” (Christie, 2008). According to our brother, to be Malawian is to eat asema: the staple food made of ground maize and water. In our house, it is women who stoke the fire and carefully add maize to the pot by the handful; stirring, scraping, covering, and scooping to cook the asema. Each family and village has their own recipes and methods, setting them apart in their localities yet together in the nation. The Malawian phrase “Maize is life” is the work of women embodying this ethic everyday, making families feel like they belong. This is corroborated by the social nature of the kitchenspace. As my family cooks, friends, family members, and neighbors come by to chat, bring ingredients, and share the meal. This challenges the idea of the “private home”. The kitchen becomes a “vital space from which women establish and maintain social reciprocity networks” (Christie, 2008). Rather than a place of unpaid production, the kitchen can be seen as a place where women create and affirm culture, cultivate belonging, and build community.

It might appear that I am avoiding problems by writing a reverse discourse. Women’s housework and informal labor is central to the iceberg of capital accumulation (Mies, 2007). However, placing our experiences within and relative to a capitalist-patriarchal lens reinforces the very worldviews we wish to dismantle (Gibson-Graham, 1997). For me, we change the world by changing ourselves. I recognize the importance of exposing the reach of oppression, and posit that the process of healing begins by reshaping where we see, feel, and place value in our lives.

Sources

Butler, O. E., Pontifell, L. I., & Ponitfell, S. M. (1993). Parable of the sower. Thornwillow Press.

Entwistle, J. (2000). Fashion and the fleshy body: Dress as embodied practice. Fashion theory, 4(3), 323-347.

Gibson-Graham, J. K. (1997). The end of capitalism (as we knew it): A feminist critique of political economy. Capital & Class, 21(2), 186-188.

MacDonald, K. (2020). Toward a transnational feminist methodology of encounter. Qualitative Research, 20(3), 249-264.

Mies, M. (2007). Patriarchy and accumulation on a world scale revisited.(Keynote lecture at the Green Economics Institute, Reading, 29 October 2005). International Journal of Green Economics, 1(3-4), 268-275.

Mullaney, E. G. (2012). Maria Elisa Christie: Kitchenspace: women, fiestas, and everyday life in Central Mexico: University of Texas Press, Austin, Texas, 2008, 308 pp, ISBN 9780292717947.
